WEEK 11

Working on windows 11

Exercise 1: Jenkins CI/CD using Git Webhook

Step-1:
To install ngroks Go->settings->privacy and security -> windows security -> off antivirus ->

Step-2:
Go -> https://ngrok.com
 and signup by giving your name, email and password of atleast 10 charcaters

Step-3:
After sign in up, it will show below screen with your name in the top left. Now click on download for windows (64Bit) to download ngork

Step-4:
After downloading, Extract the file and click on ngrok.exe

Ngrok command prompt appears as below

Step-5: Connect Your ngrok Account (optional but useful)
Go to ngrok gives you an auth token.
Then go to your Authtoken click here
Copy your Authtoken

CREATE AUTHENTICATOR [https://dashboard.ngrok.com/get-started/your-authtoken
]
Run this command in ngrok command prompt:(replace <your_token> with yours):

ngrok config add-authtoken <your_token>


Example command:

ngrok config add-authtoken 34ejJvRYKqtjvBUEYEnxudIbpb7_33i6pYx8BJ2cZ1TpwasWq


Step-6: Start a Tunnel for Jenkins

Check on which port is your Jenkins running. For this give in browser URL:

localhost:8081


For me Jenkins is running on 8081

Go to ngrok command prompt and type below command:

ngork http 8081


Type in ngrok command prompt:
Next it shows this public jenkins URL generated by ngrok that can be pasted into github repo for Webhooks.

Copy this URL only (highlighted part)

Step-7: Configure Webhook in GitHub

Go to your GitHub repository.
Navigate to Settings → Webhooks.
Click “Add webhook”.

In the Payload URL field:

Enter the Jenkins webhook URL in the format:

http://<jenkins-server-url>/github-webhook/


Example:

https://unhired-stormily-alaine.ngrok-free.dev/github-webhook/


Note: If Jenkins is running on localhost, GitHub cannot access it directly.

Step-8:
Add URL:

https://unhired-stormily-alaine.ngrok-free.dev/github-webhook/


Set content Type to application/json

Under “Which events would you like to trigger this webhook?”, select:
Just the push event.

Click “Add webhook” to save.

Step 10: Configure Jenkins to Accept GitHub Webhooks

Open Jenkins Dashboard.
Select the job (freestyle or pipeline) you’ve already created.
Click Configure.
Scroll down to the Build Triggers section.

Check the box:
GitHub hook trigger for GITScm polling

Click Save.

Step 11: Test the Setup

Make any code update in your local repo and push it to GitHub.
Once pushed, GitHub will trigger the webhook.
Jenkins will automatically detect the change and start the build pipeline.

Outcome
You’ve successfully connected GitHub and Jenkins using webhooks.
Every time you push code to GitHub, Jenkins will automatically start building your project without manual intervention.

EXCERCISE-2
Setting Up Jenkins Email Notification Setup (Using Gmail with App Password)
Creation of app password

1. Gmail: Enable App Password (for 2-Step Verification)

i. Go to: https://myaccount.google.com

ii. Enable 2-Step Verification
Navigate to:
Security → 2-Step Verification
Turn it ON
Complete the OTP verification process (via phone/email)

iii. Generate App Password for Jenkins
Go to:
Security → App passwords
Select:
App: Other (Custom name)
Name: Jenkins-Demo
Click Generate
Copy the 16-digit app password
Save it in a secure location (e.g., Notepad)

2. Jenkins Plugin Installation

i. Open Jenkins Dashboard
ii. Navigate to:
Manage Jenkins → Manage Plugins
iii. Install Plugin:

Search for and install:
Email Extension Plugin

3. Configure Jenkins Global Email Settings

i. Go to:
Manage Jenkins → Configure System

A. E-mail Notification Section
Field	Value
SMTP Server	smtp.gmail.com
Use SMTP Auth	Enabled
User Name	Your Gmail ID
Password	Paste the 16-digit App Password
Use SSL	Enabled
SMTP Port	465
Reply-To Address	Your Gmail ID

Test configuration:
Click: Test configuration by sending test e-mail

B. Extended E-mail Notification Section
Field	Value
SMTP Server	smtp.gmail.com
SMTP Port	465
Use SSL	Enabled
Credentials	Add Gmail ID + App Password
Default Content Type	text/html or default
Default Recipients	optional
Triggers	as needed
4. Configure Email Notifications for a Jenkins Job

i. Go to:
Jenkins → Select a Job → Configure

ii. In the Post-build Actions section:
Add post-build action → Editable Email Notification

Fields to fill:

Field	Value
Project Recipient List	Emails
Content Type	text/plain or text/html
Triggers	Success / Failure etc.
Attachments	Optional

Click Save.

Takeaway

Students learned how to integrate Jenkins with GitHub using webhooks to automate build triggers and configure email notifications to monitor build success or failure effectively.
